---
title: "Cyrus O'Brien - Activism"
layout: textlay
excerpt: "Cyrus O'Brien -- Activism"
sitemap: false
permalink: /activism/
---

# Criminal and Juvenile Justice Reform Activism & Advocacy

I am a prison abolitionist. I have been working to reduce and limit incarceration since 2008, when I moved to Alabama to work for juvenile justice reform. I've worked for the Southern Poverty Law Center, the Annie E. Casey Foundation, and the Project on Accountable Justice.
 quantitative analysis to date of the offense histories of children incarcerated in Florida, uncovering a methodological mistake in the state's analysis to reveal many more low-risk children in juvenile prisons than had previously been reported. A summary of this analysis, and recommendations for legislative action, was published as a white paper in December 2010 by the Southern Poverty Law Center and Florida TaxWatch and has been the basis for recent legislation (and legislation proposed for 2012) to expand diversion programs and limit the circumstances in which children can be incarcerated. After the success of this project, I was recruited by Florida TaxWatch and the Public Welfare Foundation to conduct a similar analysis of Florida's adult prison system using detailed data on each individual incarcerated in the state since 1996. Again, I uncovered a mistake in the state's methodology to reveal that more people are incarcerated for less serious crimes than previously reported. While this quantitative research revealed to me patterns of incarceration, my qualitative experiences working with and within juvenile courts in both Alabama and Florida have informed my understanding of how incarceration works on a daily, case-by-case basis. My colleagues and I worked collaboratively with local courts, analyzing their data, conducting interviews to gain insights into how systems worked, and using our findings to make informed proposals for reforms. The most challenging aspect of our work, however, was to persuade system administrators to adopt our proposed changes. This required countless hours in meetings with judges, probation officers, intake officers, detention staff, police, sheriff's deputies, and others. My colleagues and I negotiated idiosyncratic power relations within each court – which operated independently of established bureaucratic hierarchy – to build alliances and neutralize opposition to proposed reforms. By listening carefully to how people articulated their ideas about criminality, deviance, and obedience, I noticed patterns in the ways court staff advocated for more or less severe punishments for children and how some of the tropes they invoked – family life, past and potential criminality – functioned as proxies for race. Those promoting more lenient policies tended to express their arguments in affectively paternalist language. Social problems outside the control of the child, especially regarding parents and single motherhood, were prominent in these arguments; these officials often pressed their colleagues to imagine a child was their own as they made their decisions. Contrastingly, proponents of harsher policies articulated their arguments using a discourse that presumed criminality to be always increasing – a child may have done something trivial today, but tomorrow he will be worse. More disciplinary paternalism and racial discourses surfaced when officers emphasized their role as enforcers and believed their decisions sent a message to the community. I have also seen mass incarceration through the perspectives of the people it impacts most. In support of legislation against a private juvenile prison, I spent time with incarcerated children and their families. They told stories of abuse, desperation, and injustice within the system and conveyed how they felt helpless within it. In the course of a project investigating the mental health services provided at private juvenile prisons, I developed relationships with therapists who worked in juvenile facilities. These experiences have helped me comprehend the texture of incarceration from many perspectives, and will prove valuable as I interview court staff and build descriptions of their discourses and beliefs.